docs/guides/deploying/index.md, before:

# Deploying

```{eval-rst}
.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 2
  :hidden:

  deploying_docker
  deploying_public_gallery
```

These guides help you deploy marimo notebooks.

|                                 |                                                           |
| :------------------------------ | :-------------------------------------------------------- |
| {doc}`deploying_docker`         | Deploying marimo notebooks and apps with Docker           |
| {doc}`deploying_public_gallery` | Deploying marimo notebooks and apps to our public gallery |

```{admonition} Sharing notebooks on the public web
:class: tip

To share notebooks on the public web, try using [WASM
notebooks](../../guides/wasm.md), an implementation of marimo that runs
entirely in the browser -- no backend required.

WASM notebooks support most but not all Python features and packages. See our
[guide on WASM notebooks](../../guides/wasm.md) to learn more.
```

## Health and status endpoints

The following endpoints may be useful when deploying your application:

- `/health` - A health check endpoint that returns a 200 status code if the application is running as expected
- `/healthz` - Same as above, just a different name for easier integration with cloud providers
- `/api/status` - A status endpoint that returns a JSON object with the status of the server

## Configuration

If you would like to deploy your application at a subpath, you can set the `--base-url` flag when running your application.

```bash
marimo run app.py --base-url /subpath
```

## Including code in your application

You can include code in your application by using the `--include-code` flag when running your application.

```bash
marimo run app.py --include-code
```

Commit message:

feat: create_asgi_app to programatically run marimo apps (#1002)
* feat: create_asgi_app to programatically run marimo apps

* lint

* fix asgi

* fixes

docs/guides/deploying/index.md, after:

# Deploying

```{eval-rst}
.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 2
  :hidden:

  programmatically
  deploying_docker
  deploying_public_gallery
```

These guides help you deploy marimo notebooks.

|                                 |                                                           |
| :------------------------------ | :-------------------------------------------------------- |
| {doc}`programmatically`         | Programmatically run the marimo backend for customization |
| {doc}`deploying_docker`         | Deploying marimo notebooks and apps with Docker           |
| {doc}`deploying_public_gallery` | Deploying marimo notebooks and apps to our public gallery |

```{admonition} Sharing notebooks on the public web
:class: tip

To share notebooks on the public web, try using [WASM
notebooks](../../guides/wasm.md), an implementation of marimo that runs
entirely in the browser -- no backend required.

WASM notebooks support most but not all Python features and packages. See our
[guide on WASM notebooks](../../guides/wasm.md) to learn more.
```

## Programmatically running the marimo backend

When deploying marimo notebooks, you can run the marimo backend programmatically. This allows you to customize the backend to your needs and deploy it in your own environment.

See the [programmatically running the marimo backend guide](programmatically.md) for more information.

## Health and status endpoints

The following endpoints may be useful when deploying your application:

- `/health` - A health check endpoint that returns a 200 status code if the application is running as expected
- `/healthz` - Same as above, just a different name for easier integration with cloud providers
- `/api/status` - A status endpoint that returns a JSON object with the status of the server

## Configuration

If you would like to deploy your application at a subpath, you can set the `--base-url` flag when running your application.

```bash
marimo run app.py --base-url /subpath
```

## Including code in your application

You can include code in your application by using the `--include-code` flag when running your application.

```bash
marimo run app.py --include-code
```
