docs/guides/state.md, before:

# Reactive state

```{admonition} Advanced topic!
:class: warning

This guide covers reactive state (`mo.state`), an advanced topic.

**You likely don't need reactive state**. UI elements already have built-in
state, their associated value, which you can access with their `value` attribute.
For example, `mo.ui.slider()` has a value that is its current position on an
interval, while `mo.ui.button()` has a value that can be configured to
count the number of times it has been clicked, or to toggle between `True` and
`False`. Additionally, interacting with UI elements bound to global variables
[automatically executes cells](guides/interactivity) that reference those
variables, letting you react to changes by just reading their
`value` attributes. This functional paradigm is the preferred way of
reacting to UI interactions in marimo. So if you
think you need to use `mo.state`, make sure to first read the [guide on
interactivity](/guides/interactivity.md). Chances are, the reactive execution
built into UI elements will suffice. (For example, [you don't need reactive
state to handle a button click](/recipes.md#working-with-buttons).)


That said, here are some signs you might need `mo.state`:
- you need to maintain historical state related to a UI element that can't
  be computed from its built-in `value` (_e.g._, all values the user has
  ever input into a form)
- you need to synchronize two different UI elements (_e.g._, so that
  interacting with either one controls the other)
- you need to introduce cycles across cells

If one of these cases applies to you, then read on. `mo.state` lets you make
all kinds of interesting applications, but like mutable state in general,
it can complicate notebook development and has the potential to
introduce hard-to-find bugs. 
```

You can build powerful, interactive notebooks and apps using just `mo.ui` and
reactivity.

But sometimes, you might want interactions to mutate state:

- You're building a checklist, and you want to maintain a list of action
  items, even as you add and remove some items.

<div align="center" style="margin-top:2rem; margin-bottom:2rem">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-task-list.gif"/>
</figure>
<figcaption>A proof-of-concept TODO list made using state.</figcaption>
</div>


- You want to tie two different UI elements so that updating one updates
  the other.

<div align="center" style="margin-top:2rem; margin-bottom:2rem">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-tied.gif"/>
<figcaption>Use state to tie two elements together.</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>


For cases like these, marimo provides the function [`mo.state()`](/api/state),
which creates a state object and returns a getter and setter function. When you
call the setter function in one cell, all other cells that reference the getter
function **via a global variable** are automatically run (similar to UI
elements).


```{admonition} State and UI elements are similar
:class: note

State is analogous to UI elements. When you interact
with a UI element, all cells that reference that element via a global variable
run automatically with the new value. In the same way, when you update state
via the setter, all other cells that reference the getter via
a global variable run automatically with the new value.

State is particularly useful when used in conjunction with a `UIElement`'s
`on_change` callback to run side effects based on user input.
```

## Creating state

[`mo.state()`](/api/state) takes an initial state value as its argument, creates
a state object, and returns

- a getter function for reading the state
- a setter function for updating the state

For exaxmple,

```python
get_counter, set_counter = mo.state(0)
```

```{admonition} Assign state to global variables!
:class: attention

When using `mo.state()`, **you must assign the state getter to a global
variable**. This is similar to UI elements work.
```

## Reading state

Access the state's latest value via the getter:

```python
get_counter()
```

## Updating state

You can update a state's value by calling its setter function with a new value.
For example,

```python
set_counter(1)
```

To update the state based on its current value, pass a function that takes
the current state value as an argument and returns a new value

```python
set_counter(lambda count: count + 1)
```

A single rule determines what happens next:

```{admonition} State reactivity rule
:class: tip

When a state setter function is called in one cell,  marimo
automatically runs all _other_ cells that reference any **global** variables
assigned to the state getter.
```

This rule has some important aspects:

1. Only cells that read the state getter via a global variable will be run.
2. The cell that called the setter won't be re-run, even if it references
   the getter.

Notice how similar this rule is to the reactivity rule for UI element
interactions.

## Using state with UI elements

Every UI element takes an optional `on_change` callback, a function that takes
the new value of the element and does anything with it. You can use the setter
function in an `on_change` callback to mutate state.

```{admonition} Use state sparingly
:class: note

You can get far using just `mo.ui`, without state. But judiciously using
state can simplify the implementation of highly interactive notebooks/apps, and
also enables new use cases. The next few examples showcase good uses of state.
```

### Example: counter
The next few cells implement a counter controlled by two buttons. This
particular example could be implemented without state (try it!), but the
implementation using state is simpler. 


<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-counter.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
```

```python
get_counter, set_counter = mo.state(0)

increment = mo.ui.button(
    label="increment",
    on_change=lambda _: set_counter(lambda v: v + 1),
)

decrement = mo.ui.button(
    label="decrement",
    on_change=lambda _: set_counter(lambda v: v - 1),
)

mo.hstack([increment, decrement], justify="center")
```

```python
mo.md(
    f"""
    The counter's current value is **{get_counter()}**!

    This cell runs automatically on button click, even though it 
    doesn't reference either button. 
    """
)
```

### Example: tied elements

This example shows how to tie two different UI elements so that each one's
value depends on the other. This is impossible to do without `mo.state`.

<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-tied.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
```

```python
get_x, set_x = mo.state(0)
```

```python
x = mo.ui.slider(
    0, 10, value=get_x(), on_change=set_x, label="$x$:"
)
```

```python
x_plus_one = mo.ui.number(
    1,
    11,
    value=get_x() + 1,
    on_change=lambda v: set_x_state(v - 1),
    label="$x + 1$:",
)
```

```python
[x, x_plus_one]
```

```{admonition} Create tied UI elements in separate cells
:class: note

Notice that we created the slider and number elements in different cells.
When tying elements, this is necessary, because calling a setter
in a cell queues all _other_ cells reading the state to run, not including
the one that just called the setter.
```

```{admonition} Cycles at runtime
:class: warning
You can use state to introduce cycles across cells at runtime. This lets
you tie multiple UI elements together, for example. Just be careful not to
introduce an infinite loop!

marimo programs are statically parsed into directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
involving cells, and state doesn't change that. Think of state setters
as hooking into the DAG: at runtime, when they're invoked (and only when
they're invoked), they trigger additional computation.
```

### Example: todo list

The next few cells use state to create a todo list.

<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-task-list.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
from dataclasses import dataclass
```

```python
@dataclass
class Task:
    name: str
    done: bool = False


get_tasks, set_tasks = mo.state([])
task_added, set_task_added = mo.state(False)
```

```python
# Refresh the text box whenever a task is added
task_added

task_entry_box = mo.ui.text(placeholder="a task ...")
```

```python
def add_task():
    if task_entry_box.value:
        set_tasks(lambda v: v + [Task(task_entry_box.value)])
        set_task_added(True)

def clear_tasks():
    set_tasks(lambda v: [task for task in v if not task.done])

add_task_button = mo.ui.button(
    label="add task",
    on_change=lambda _: add_task(),
)

clear_tasks_button = mo.ui.button(
    label="clear completed tasks",
    on_change=lambda _: clear_tasks()
)
```

```
task_list = mo.ui.array(
    [mo.ui.checkbox(value=task.done, label=task.name) for task in get_tasks()],
    label="tasks",
    on_change=lambda v: set_tasks(
        lambda tasks: [Task(task.name, done=v[i]) for i, task in enumerate(tasks)]
    ),
)
```

```
mo.hstack(
    [task_entry_box, add_task_button, clear_tasks_button], justify="start"
)
```

Commit message:

Add an option to allow self-loops on `mo.state` (#809)
* allow self loop state

* add test

* update guide

* typecheck

docs/guides/state.md, after:

# Reactive state

```{admonition} Advanced topic!
:class: warning

This guide covers reactive state (`mo.state`), an advanced topic.

**You likely don't need reactive state**. UI elements already have built-in
state, their associated value, which you can access with their `value` attribute.
For example, `mo.ui.slider()` has a value that is its current position on an
interval, while `mo.ui.button()` has a value that can be configured to
count the number of times it has been clicked, or to toggle between `True` and
`False`. Additionally, interacting with UI elements bound to global variables
[automatically executes cells](guides/interactivity) that reference those
variables, letting you react to changes by just reading their
`value` attributes. This functional paradigm is the preferred way of
reacting to UI interactions in marimo. So if you
think you need to use `mo.state`, make sure to first read the [guide on
interactivity](/guides/interactivity.md). Chances are, the reactive execution
built into UI elements will suffice. (For example, [you don't need reactive
state to handle a button click](/recipes.md#working-with-buttons).)


That said, here are some signs you might need `mo.state`:
- you need to maintain historical state related to a UI element that can't
  be computed from its built-in `value` (_e.g._, all values the user has
  ever input into a form)
- you need to synchronize two different UI elements (_e.g._, so that
  interacting with either one controls the other)
- you need to introduce cycles across cells

If one of these cases applies to you, then read on. `mo.state` lets you make
all kinds of interesting applications, but like mutable state in general,
it can complicate notebook development and has the potential to
introduce hard-to-find bugs. 
```

You can build powerful, interactive notebooks and apps using just `mo.ui` and
reactivity.

But sometimes, you might want interactions to mutate state:

- You're building a checklist, and you want to maintain a list of action
  items, even as you add and remove some items.

<div align="center" style="margin-top:2rem; margin-bottom:2rem">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-task-list.gif"/>
</figure>
<figcaption>A proof-of-concept TODO list made using state.</figcaption>
</div>


- You want to tie two different UI elements so that updating one updates
  the other.

<div align="center" style="margin-top:2rem; margin-bottom:2rem">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-tied.gif"/>
<figcaption>Use state to tie two elements together.</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>


For cases like these, marimo provides the function [`mo.state()`](/api/state),
which creates a state object and returns a getter and setter function. When you
call the setter function in one cell, all other cells that reference the getter
function **via a global variable** are automatically run (similar to UI
elements).


```{admonition} State and UI elements are similar
:class: note

State is analogous to UI elements. When you interact
with a UI element, all cells that reference that element via a global variable
run automatically with the new value. In the same way, when you update state
via the setter, all other cells that reference the getter via
a global variable run automatically with the new value.

State is particularly useful when used in conjunction with a `UIElement`'s
`on_change` callback to run side effects based on user input.
```

## Creating state

[`mo.state()`](/api/state) takes an initial state value as its argument, creates
a state object, and returns

- a getter function for reading the state
- a setter function for updating the state

For exaxmple,

```python
get_counter, set_counter = mo.state(0)
```

```{admonition} Assign state to global variables!
:class: attention

When using `mo.state()`, **you must assign the state getter to a global
variable**. This is similar to UI elements work.
```

## Reading state

Access the state's latest value via the getter:

```python
get_counter()
```

## Updating state

You can update a state's value by calling its setter function with a new value.
For example,

```python
set_counter(1)
```

To update the state based on its current value, pass a function that takes
the current state value as an argument and returns a new value

```python
set_counter(lambda count: count + 1)
```

A single rule determines what happens next:

```{admonition} State reactivity rule
:class: tip

When a state setter function is called in one cell,  marimo
automatically runs all _other_ cells that reference any **global** variables
assigned to the state getter.
```

This rule has some important aspects:

1. Only cells that read the state getter via a global variable will be run.
2. The cell that called the setter won't be re-run, even if it references
   the getter. This restriction helps prevent against bugs that could
   otherwise arise. To lift this restriction, and allow the caller cell
   to be re-run, create your state with `mo.state(value, allow_self_loops=True)`.

Notice how similar this rule is to the reactivity rule for UI element
interactions.

## Using state with UI elements

Every UI element takes an optional `on_change` callback, a function that takes
the new value of the element and does anything with it. You can use the setter
function in an `on_change` callback to mutate state.

```{admonition} Use state sparingly
:class: note

You can get far using just `mo.ui`, without state. But judiciously using
state can simplify the implementation of highly interactive notebooks/apps, and
also enables new use cases. The next few examples showcase good uses of state.
```

### Example: counter
The next few cells implement a counter controlled by two buttons. This
particular example could be implemented without state (try it!), but the
implementation using state is simpler. 


<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-counter.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
```

```python
get_counter, set_counter = mo.state(0)

increment = mo.ui.button(
    label="increment",
    on_change=lambda _: set_counter(lambda v: v + 1),
)

decrement = mo.ui.button(
    label="decrement",
    on_change=lambda _: set_counter(lambda v: v - 1),
)

mo.hstack([increment, decrement], justify="center")
```

```python
mo.md(
    f"""
    The counter's current value is **{get_counter()}**!

    This cell runs automatically on button click, even though it 
    doesn't reference either button. 
    """
)
```

### Example: tied elements

This example shows how to tie two different UI elements so that each one's
value depends on the other. This is impossible to do without `mo.state`.

<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-tied.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
```

```python
get_x, set_x = mo.state(0)
```

```python
x = mo.ui.slider(
    0, 10, value=get_x(), on_change=set_x, label="$x$:"
)
```

```python
x_plus_one = mo.ui.number(
    1,
    11,
    value=get_x() + 1,
    on_change=lambda v: set_x_state(v - 1),
    label="$x + 1$:",
)
```

```python
[x, x_plus_one]
```

```{admonition} Create tied UI elements in separate cells
:class: note

Notice that we created the slider and number elements in different cells.
When tying elements, this is necessary, because calling a setter
in a cell queues all _other_ cells reading the state to run, not including
the one that just called the setter.
```

```{admonition} Cycles at runtime
:class: warning
You can use state to introduce cycles across cells at runtime. This lets
you tie multiple UI elements together, for example. Just be careful not to
introduce an infinite loop!

marimo programs are statically parsed into directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
involving cells, and state doesn't change that. Think of state setters
as hooking into the DAG: at runtime, when they're invoked (and only when
they're invoked), they trigger additional computation.
```

### Example: todo list

The next few cells use state to create a todo list.

<div align="center">
<figure>
<img src="/_static/docs-state-task-list.gif"/>
</figure>
</div>


```python
import marimo as mo
from dataclasses import dataclass
```

```python
@dataclass
class Task:
    name: str
    done: bool = False


get_tasks, set_tasks = mo.state([])
task_added, set_task_added = mo.state(False)
```

```python
# Refresh the text box whenever a task is added
task_added

task_entry_box = mo.ui.text(placeholder="a task ...")
```

```python
def add_task():
    if task_entry_box.value:
        set_tasks(lambda v: v + [Task(task_entry_box.value)])
        set_task_added(True)

def clear_tasks():
    set_tasks(lambda v: [task for task in v if not task.done])

add_task_button = mo.ui.button(
    label="add task",
    on_change=lambda _: add_task(),
)

clear_tasks_button = mo.ui.button(
    label="clear completed tasks",
    on_change=lambda _: clear_tasks()
)
```

```
task_list = mo.ui.array(
    [mo.ui.checkbox(value=task.done, label=task.name) for task in get_tasks()],
    label="tasks",
    on_change=lambda v: set_tasks(
        lambda tasks: [Task(task.name, done=v[i]) for i, task in enumerate(tasks)]
    ),
)
```

```
mo.hstack(
    [task_entry_box, add_task_button, clear_tasks_button], justify="start"
)
```
